---
excerpt: <p>So, I have a problem with the hype surrounding "<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_2.0"
  target="_blank">Web 2.0</a>" [1], which is mainly that it's not as new as everyone
  claims.  Definitely, it's a new ballpark from the first round of websites, which
  were (for the most part) static, clunky, and non-interactive.</p>
categories:
- ict4d
tags:
- tinkering
header:
    overlay_image: /assets/images/960px-Web_2.0_Map.svg.png
    overlay_filter: 0.5
    teaser: /assets/images/960px-Web_2.0_Map.svg.png
    caption: "CC-BY-SA Markus Angermeier Vectorised and linked version by Luca / WikiMedia"


title: Web 2.0 + 10
created: 1138673902
---
<p>So, I have a problem with the hype surrounding "<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_2.0" target="_blank">Web 2.0</a>" [1], which is mainly that it's not as new as everyone claims.  Definitely, it's a new ballpark from the first round of websites, which were (for the most part) static, clunky, and non-interactive.</p>

<p>Nevertheless, the wonder and excitement of Web 2.0 reminds me heavily of the early days of the Internet, and the non-web parts of it -- BBSes, Usenet, and the command-line interface world of remote-login Unix boxes.  IM and chat rooms were possible through the "talk" command, shared social spaces (created often wholly by more senior members of the community) existed in the text-adventure world of <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muds" target="_blank">muds/moos</a>, and blog-like posts made it into early webpages with cheerful (at least sometimes) banter going on through guestbook scripts or email that the authors could post to the original article.</p>

<p>It seems that the main difference is that the new communities are a smaller chunk of the net community; the overall size of the net has expanded so greatly that the utopic community that Barlow et al saw became unsustainable and beyond the scope of anarchy/self-regulation for the entire group (I was tempted to title this entry "The Myth of Sysopus" after the legendary role that someone dubbed a sysop/wizard in the earlier days had).</p>

<p>But this need to form communities has re-expressed itself, and the interface is blissfully better than (ok, for the most part) what we had to deal with before.  Of course, for the larger/more global new/web 2.0 communities, we have to wonder if we'll go through another round of fragmentation as they themselves outgrow their ability to self-regulate.  Wikipedia has received its fair share of criticism this past month for <a href="https://yro.slashdot.org/yro/06/01/30/2123219.shtml" target="_blank">inaccuracies</a>; but, I think this is overlooking the vast amounts of valid and quality information -- and only a first inkling in the eventual hassles it will face.</p>

<p>But what does this all mean for development?</p>

<p>This lower bar for getting information and forming communities through the net brings in a lot more noise (think myspace/facebook), but it also enables some minimally tech-savvy types to get an easily-maintained presence online and benefit from a kind of global cost-sharing of development/hosting/problem solving through F/LOSS (open source) tools, hosted, ad and member-supported apps like Flickr and Blogger [2]</p>
